
If a blockchain network as a whole is going to match the performance of a single node, that implies that bandwidth cannot be the bottleneck, but rather computation. To achieve this, we need to first optimize how the nodes in the network communicate.

Wireless cellular networks offer many similarities to blockchain-based networks, and have long been focused on optimizing network communication. At scale, no single radio tower has enough bandwidth to give each cell phone its own radio frequency to transmit on, so telecom companies needed “multiple access technologies” to cram multiple phone calls on the same frequency.

Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) is one of the major technologies that enabled massive scalability in cellular networks. TDMA specifies that towers divide each radio frequency into time slots, and allocate these time slots to each phone call. In this manner, the cell tower provides a globally available clock for the network. This massively increases scalability of limited bandwidth by letting each frequency support multiple, simultaneous data channels, and decreasing interference from multiple phones broadcasting on the same frequency at the same time.

Today’s blockchain-based networks have a clock problem. Their clocks “tick” whenever a new block is produced. For Ethereum, that happens once every fifteen seconds, and there’s only so much information that can be fit into a single block. The TDMA-equivalent for blockchain-based networks would be a clock with sub-second granularity that all validating nodes agree on, so that they can more efficiently process transactions.

The core Solana innovation is **Proof of History** (POH), a globally-available, permissionless source of time in the network that works before consensus. POH is not a consensus protocol or anti-Sybil mechanism. Rather, POH is a solution to the clock problem.

Whereas other blockchains require validators to talk to one another in order to agree that time has passed, each Solana validator maintains its own clock by encoding the passage of time in a simple SHA-256, sequential-hashing verifiable delay function (VDF). Solana does not use a VDF for randomness. Instead, each validator uses the VDF to maintain its own clock. Because each validator maintains its own clock, leader selection is scheduled ahead of time for an entire epoch. Like Tendermint, the schedule for an epoch lasts for thousands of blocks. However, unlike Tendermint, the network never waits for a failed node. Each validator runs the VDF to prove that it has acquired its slot to transmit a block and validators. Each validator is compensated for doing so because the block producer receives a reward for producing a block.

Enabled by Proof of History, leaders continue to rotate and the network as a whole makes progress regardless of network conditions. This means that the network _never_ stops. The network can make a decision to rotate validators _without any of the validators talking to one another_. This is a subtle but profound shift. No other blockchain has a comparable mechanism. In every other chain, validators must communicate in order to make a decision. In Solana, leader rotation decisions are made asynchronously.

This core innovation opened up the design space going up the stack. In addition to providing a clock that can be used for timestamping, POH allows Solana to optimize for block time (800ms), block propagation (log200(n)), throughput (50K-80=K TPS)), and ledger storage (petabytes) available on the network.